## Rise of the people person

#### Those who can do work and those who can’t
Sometimes I worry that online discussions tend to promote theories which involve clever trains of logic or result in appealingly counter-intuitive conclusions. Meanwhile, there are simple schematizations with much more explanative power that are so obvious that no-one bothers to articulate them. At the risk of appearing simple, I’d like to venture a simple dichotomy that I think can explain a lot about the world. I want to distinguish between people who can undertake important work and those who can’t, and the consequences that naturally result from this. 

I define the ‘those who can do work’ as possessing two essential characteristics: they have some sort of difficult-to-acquire skillset and they play a vital role in the continuing success of the firm or organization in which they’re employed. 

I am principally thinking here of skilled workers in technical occupations, who are often surrounded by less-able administrators, managers, and the host of ancillary white-collar workers such as HR who seem to make up an ever-growing fraction of the labour force. However, I don’t want to suggest that the category is exclusively limited to these workers, so to pre-empt the claim I’m just some sort of STEM-bro let us consider an event planner as a less archetypical example. Event planners seldom possess prodigious talent but they nonetheless have some sort of skillset (certainly I couldn’t plan a large event without some guidance on how to go about it) and they’re doing work that matters (in the sense that if they don’t do their job, bad things will happen and people will certainly notice). This is sufficient to put event planners into the ‘people who can do work’ category.

With the preliminaries out of the way, let’s make a few reasonably straight-forward observations. 

#### People Skills 
People who lack any discernable skills will invariably claim they have people skills. Obviously they can hardly admit they’re unskilled, either to their colleagues or I suspect to themselves. But if they claim they’re accomplished in tort law or structural engineering or some other reasonably concrete skill, they might be found out, so their only recourse is to claim they’ve got an abundance of people skills, a concept sufficiently nebulous that it’s all but impossible to disprove. 

Because people skills are so easily counterfeited, they have somewhat less prestige than actual, readily-verifiable skills. For this reason, people with both technical skills and people skills will more commonly identify as someone who is technically accomplished than as someone who has people skills. The upshot of all this is that whether someone purports to have people skills tells us very little about their ability to deal with people, but a lot about their other skills or lack thereof. 

#### Free Time
People who can’t do work have a lot more free-time at work than the people who can. They can use this free-time to influence the organisation in all sorts of ways. If a corporation say, decides to have a stance on the Palestinian question despite it having no relevance to its own business, you can be guaranteed that the people within the corporation who are pushing this are not the same people toiling away to get a feature into the next software release.

One way in which this free-time can be spent is in office politics. While the people who can do work spend their time adding value directly to the business, the people who can’t spend their time ingratiating themselves with higher-ups and participating in various political machinations. This means they can be almost impossible to expel from an organization, because they’ll always have a disproportionate say in staffing decisions; the people who do the real work are too busy doing said work to have much say in the future org-chart. 

This phenomenon is especially apparent in the civil service, where attempts to cut waste always end up cutting into muscle while leaving the fat undisturbed. The people doing the real work are always the first in the firing line when cuts are announced, such that even a small cut to an immensely bloated bureaucracy can nonetheless cripple the capacity of the department in question. The lesson eventually learnt by politicians, sometimes after some hard-learnt lessons, is to simply never cut the civil service. 
#### Make-work
Now you can have too much of a good thing, and too much free-time is indeed a problem for an employee. For someone with difficult-to-acquire skills who performs important work, they can potentially get by doing only 10 hours of work a week secure in the knowledge that they’re irreplaceable. But the people who can’t do work are always afflicted with job insecurity because they know that they are very easily replaceable, for such people it’s important to find ways to make themselves indispensable and to be seen to be adding value to the organisation. 

Regrettably their attempts to make work for themselves also makes work for others, including the people who are already doing genuinely important work. Let us consider an example. 

Suppose you’re one of these people who can’t really do anything productive and you’re looking around for something to do, you note that the organisation currently pays little attention to protecting the privacy of its customers. ‘Aha’, you think, ‘I’ll make myself an authority on privacy and everyone will have to defer to me on the issue, which will make me less replaceable’. Of course you can’t then simply spend a lot of time writing up documents in your office on privacy, because then no-one would be aware of all the important work you’re doing. Indeed to secure your position within the organisation, the vital point is to make other employees depend on you in some way. So you create a process whereby others have to check with you that what they’re doing complies with best-practice vis-à-vis privacy. There’ll be some push-back from people who don’t want more paperwork to fill in, but organisations are run as strict-hierarchies and so productive workers can be forced to waste their time by their superiors. The manager of the person who’s pushing for the privacy process will themselves benefit from the increased importance of their subordinate (as the more important the people you manage, the more important you are as a manager). Besides which a great many managers fall into the category of people looking for work to do because they themselves are equally inutile, so such schemes are a good way for them to say they’ve accomplished something as well.

Creating new processes is an especially effective method of increasing one’s job security. A company can externally hire people with technical skills, it cannot hire someone with an intimate knowledge of the company-specific processes which you have created because you had nothing better to do. The more convoluted and labyrinthine the rules and procedures within an organisation, the greater the value of being familiar with them is to institutional insiders. Even if someone else is creating the process, a useless person knows they have the free-time to learn how it works and that this knowledge is a reasonable substitute for being actually skilled, so they’ll invariably support the implementation of new processes.

The prodigious growth of compliance bureaucracies is oft-commented on, but frequently this growth is erroneously blamed on regulation. But if you look around you’ll find that these compliance bureaucracies exist even in jurisdictions or areas of concern which are rather lightly regulated. Even where the regulations exist, they’re almost never enforced, and are rather used as an excuse by useless people to create more bureaucracy. Indeed, in the Anglo-tradition companies are almost self-regulating, regulators almost never have the funding to enforce the regulations (especially through the courts) and regulatory capture means said regulations have often been written by the industry that is being regulated in any case. Self-regulation works perfectly well because a lot of people in these industries are looking for work to do, and complying with regulations certainly constitutes work. Also note that where regulations come into conflict with value-creation, they’re readily ignored. Uber flagrantly flouted labour regulations all over the world, but it will nonetheless have compliance bureaucracies in other areas which don’t impinge upon profitability.

When making work for yourself, you ideally want a low-risk project that requires no skills (as you don’t possess skills). Spear-heading the replacement of a critical piece of IT infrastructure would be a poor choice (consequently many organisations run on enterprise systems with components decades out of date). But spear-heading a diversity and inclusion initiative fits the bill perfectly. This is almost a risk-free project for someone with nothing appreciable to contribute to the world who nonetheless wants to increase their standing within an organisation. Anyone who opposes DEI must first understand why it’s successful, which has nothing to do with ideology at all, but rather the insatiable appetite for projects which useless people can leverage to increase their power. And before you think I’m dunking on DEI for political reasons, there are innumerable other examples where I have no political axe to grind. I am entirely seized of the need to do more on climate change, but most green-washing campaigns by companies achieve nothing either from the perspective of global warming or PR. They do help the careers of the managers and marketers who push them though. Or to take another example, ‘R U OK day’ has been an enormous success in Australia as companies everywhere have embraced it, despite being universally detested. Sure, you can perhaps do some mental gymnastics and claim that mentally healthy workers are more productive and these companies are rationally pursuing profits, but the much better explanation is that these initiatives are ideal make-work projects for people who cannot do any useful work because they lack ability. 

#### Organisational Decline
It should be reasonably clear from the discussion so far that large organisations naturally make much better hosts for people who can’t do work than small organisations. Even if large organisations were perfectly managed, there’d be more bureaucratic overhead necessary to keep them working well simply due to the managerial problems which emerge at scale. But it’s within this bureaucratic layer where people who can’t do any work insinuate themselves, the larger this layer the easier it is for them to thrive. 
People who can’t do work have a collective interest in creating an environment in which people like themselves can succeed. Over time they can almost completely hollow-out a company as they make it increasingly difficult for able individuals to do their important work. Reward mechanisms are intentionally regeared so as to reward people with no skills. A small tech company might focus its rewards on tech talent, a large one will increasingly distribute these rewards to people who can’t do proper work. Thus bureaucracy begets more bureaucracy and once the malignancy starts growing it can be almost impossible to extirpate. 

C. Northcote Parkinson famously observed that the British Colonial Office reached peak staffing right before it was folded into the Foreign Office due to a lack of colonies to administer. I would go so far as to say that the lack of colonies probably increased the number of workers there. For when an organisation is growing organically, there is a lot of work to be done, and one would expect staffing to grow roughly commensurate to its increasing need for labour. But when an organisation needs less work done over time, say due to a loss of colonies, then that process by its very nature forces people to start making work for themselves and others, the expansion of which has no natural limit. A manager who might have facilitated genuinely productive work in a growing environment might start producing needless work in a shrinking one.

As an interestingly caveat, even people with genuine skills can fall into trap. Software requires less work to maintain than it does to build, yet few tech companies start reducing head-count once their only piece of software reaches maturity. If anything hiring might accelerate once workers are no longer needed. Similarly we’re all familiar with cases where software seems to reach its zenith and then starts getting worse over time, with unnecessary and highly opinionated UI changes and so forth, this is likely the output of people who can no longer do any genuinely productive work because the real work has already been done. One ramification of this is that tech companies should probably attempt to grow at any cost, because a serious malaise will set-in the moment they stop.

The fact that large companies are more vulnerable to a growing parasitic class of people who can’t do work can explain the rise and fall of firms in the economy. There are huge incumbency advantages which, one would think, would make it almost impossible for corporate behemoths to ever be replaced. Yet they are in fact frequently usurped by more nimble and better managed upstarts. This phenomenon is less surprising when one has worked in large corporations and start-ups and seen that the latter is often better-managed. But the exact cause of this has always been a mystery. 

Business majors speak of ‘corporate culture’ which imparts almost no information whatsoever seeing as just about anything falls under the umbrella of culture. Better is the analogy with organisms, that companies grow senescent and sclerotic over time. This is suggestive, but still doesn’t explain why this happens, after all organisms grow old for specific reasons not just due to the ineluctable forward-march of time. Sclerosis is the result of a proliferation of rules and processes which make an organisation inflexible and incapable of adapting itself to changing circumstances. Sometimes it’s said that red tape grows even though everyone opposes its growth. This is not some curious paradox, it’s simply not true, I work in the civil service and I assure you a great many people’s careers depend on the ever-growing rolls of red-tape and the last thing they’re likely to do is jeopardise their career by reducing the amount of red-tape. Sclerosis is a direct result of an organisation becoming increasingly dominated by the unskilled people-person.
#### Cultural Decline
But why stop there? What if the same trend which drives the rise and fall of private firms might also explain the rise and fall of nations and civilisations? It’s not all that contentious so say that China seems to be better governed than many Western countries, as demonstrated by its ability to ‘get stuff done’. Trying to identify the institutional features which might explain this is surprisingly difficult though, when examined up close the governance arrangements of China do not appear particularly favourable even compared to the US. What if the explanation instead lies in the fact that Chinese institutions, unlike Western ones, are still dominated by people who can do work? The CCP leadership is (or was) renowned for being full of engineers and scientists, that is people with actual technical ability who can do productive work. 

The useless people-person doesn’t just enervate organisations from within, once they dominate the hegemonic institutions they can begin the gradual process of corrupting the mass culture. For instance, every generation that goes by there seems to be less emphasis on intelligence and intellectual acumen within the school system. The attacks on SATs and any other form of standardised testing being a demonstration of this fact. But this isn’t a problem confined to the school system, on the contrary academia, the media and the public service all have their part in trying to deprecate skills and the ability to do things, in favour of other values like kindness, sensitivity, holding the correct political beliefs, etc. Is this not the signal triumph of the unskilled people person? When they have accumulated sufficient power that they can rewrite the values that underpin society so that their own lack of ability is no longer a deficiency? The very notion of merit has been problematised due to the ressentiment of a class of people conspicuously lacking in merit.

Occasionally the department of defence might realise that no amount of niceness will protect the country from future cyberattacks, and there’ll be some feeble attempt to interest youngsters in STEM, but this sort of counter-example runs against the overwhelming cultural current that seeks to denigrate and belittle technical ability.  
This culture becomes self-reinforcing as young people respond to the perverse incentives created therefrom. Witness the rise of the ‘party school’ in the US, people who attend such schools are not sabotaging their careers due to a short-term hedonistic mindset. For in a society where people-skills such as networking are prized above all else, partying might very well be a better investment than studying maths or reading Kant. 

When I studied post-graduate mathematics in Melbourne, Australia I was studying almost exclusively along-side East Asians. This is not some maths-specific phenomenon, if one goes to orchestral auditions one can see a clear trend where East Asians are growing ever-more numerous among the top talent. This is what happens when people from one culture which still prizes excellence come up against another culture which holds such excellence in contempt. The people from the former are simply willing to work harder and invest more in their skills.

#### Decadence
The derogation of ability is the product of a fundamentally *decadent* culture. Cultures which have recently emerged from hardship, either material deprivation or violence, will value ability more highly because the returns to ability were higher in the recent past. The competence of a general is more important during war, the competence of a business-man more important during a depression. The denigration of ability is a luxury that cannot be afforded during difficult times. Even once the period of difficulty has passed, it can take generations to erode the values that were created during the period. 

We can further generalise the process whereby values change. In the first instance, a culture may be said to be in some sort of steady-state equilibrium when incentives are aligned with values. For example murder is both harshly condemned, and murderers are punished such that it’s almost never in anyone’s self-interest to murder someone else. The next stage is when the incentives are changed so that there is a conflict between rational self-interest and widely held values. If murder were legalised and murder became a useful tool to help one succeed in one’s endeavours, it would not instantly lead to a revaluation of murder. But over time, people who are willing to murder would have an advantage over those who were unwilling, and ultimately some of the most successful and respected people would be murderers. As humans seek to emulate those with higher status than themselves, the stigma of being a murderer would gradually fade away. Once upon a time usury was deplored and banned, then deplored but permissible and people who practiced usury became rich, and now the stigma is all but vanished in time.

Thus it might be the case that both China and the US insufficiently reward merit, but the gradual devaluation of merit that occurs in the following stage is far more advanced in the US. 

#### Prediction
The obvious prediction here is that it the West is going to have a very hard time competing with China. Much like the Roman Empire it is too decadent to defend itself. The late Roman Empire couldn’t get its citizens to fight for them and the US cannot get its citizens to study hard and become technically accomplished. Just as the Roman Empire increasingly relied upon foreign auxiliaries, the US has flooded itself with skilled migrants in a desperate attempt to remain competitive in the technological arena despite being so culturally impoverished that it cannot produce indigenous talent. The best hope the West has is that an extended period of hardship might lead to reversal of its decadent tendencies so that people of ability will once again rise above the malignant people-person. 

 




 


 
